Hello, everyone out there on the live stream.
We're just about to start the podcast.
Thank you for being here.
Be sure to jump in and put some stuff in the comments if you'd like to be part of the show.
We'll try to take that and fold it in, fold your comments into the various sections.
So Jason, Brian, you guys ready to start this episode?
>> How long is it?
>> Yes, definitely.
Brian, you start it or am I?
I don't remember.
It's odd, so it's probably me.
Yeah, that sounds odd.
Yeah.
Okay.
Alright, go for it.
Hello and welcome to Python Bytes,
where we deliver Python news and headlines directly to your earbuds.
This is episode 215, recorded January 6th,
one of my favorite dates, 2021.
I'm Brian Okken.
I'm Michael Kennedy.
And we have Jason.
- Hello.
- Yeah, hey Jason, nice to have you here.
Jason McDonald.
- Yeah, it's good to be here.
Thank you for having me.
- Yeah, thanks for joining us.
Oh, and Brian, I think he's gonna cover something
we haven't really covered much on the show, GUIs.
- Oh, good.
(laughing)
- Yeah.
- Actually, to be honest, I know this is like
a longstanding joke in the show for long-time listeners,
but we actually haven't covered GUIs that much recently,
but there was a long stretch where we did.
- Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, that was probably like a year ago.
- Yeah.
like a year ago. Yeah, yeah. I like my programming projects and my brownies to be gooey. And
fudge. Come on, fudge is good. And you like bad jokes. So you'll fit in nicely. Oh, absolutely.
No, if anyone likes puns, follow my Twitter. I post an original every Monday. Nice. All
right, Brian. I heard that there's gonna be a lot of exciting news for space in 2021.
So I kind of want to bring a little space and Python together.
>> Oh, that's good.
Yeah.
>> Yeah.
So the first topic that I want to talk about is this video done by a woman in the UK who
is an astrophysicist.
She goes by the name Dr. Becky, which is cool.
She has a fantastic YouTube channel.
She's also a Python developer and she works in cosmology, which is pretty cool.
And she did this video that I'd just like to highlight for people who maybe are coming
into Python not from the, "Hey, I'm going to create a microservice set of APIs talking
to Docker," but more from the, "Hey, I do some kind of science or data science or something
like that."
And the video is called, "The Five Ways That I Use Code As An Astrophysicist."
Cool, huh?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, so she basically lays out the idea of as a modern day scientist, you can barely
do your job if you're not doing some sort of programming.
Of course, one of the best languages, technologies for programming these days is Python in the
data science space, right?
>> Surprise, surprise.
>> Yeah, no big surprise there since 2012, I would say.
She covers five different things with examples of each.
I thought that was just a nice way for people who are either getting into Python from a
science side or maybe they're teachers and they want people ask, "Why should I not just
use MATLAB or some other custom tool?"
Let me show you.
Here's some really cool examples of real astronomy being done with Python, but it's also super
accessible to even middle schoolers, I would say.
Number one is image processing of galaxies from telescopes.
You can do things like noise removal.
It turns out that when you're taking pictures of galaxies, even if there's no actual background
light or disturbances, just the basic disturbance in the actual sensors themselves will put
little marks and imperfections in the images.
Using Python to go through and clean those up makes it much easier to get started.
The size of these pictures and the amount of data coming in from some of these new telescopes
is stunningly large.
>> That's cool.
>> For sure.
Another one is data analysis.
If you're trying to find the brightness of some part of an image, say maybe you're looking
for a transit of an exoplanet, you want to constantly monitor the brightness of a star,
Or in her case, what she's studying, it just blows my mind, she's studying galaxies.
When you see pictures of stars and you're zooming in, you're like, "Oh, that's not a
star, that's a galaxy."
It's just, I still can't really get my mind around that.
But she talks about one of her data sets that has 600,000 rows of brightness of galaxies.
So 600,000 galaxies, they all have information about that they're comparing.
So that's pretty awesome, right?
fitting. There's an example about a theory that most galaxies have a supermassive black
hole in the middle. There's also this idea that possibly the size of the black hole and
the size of the galaxy, these things kind of grow in mass together. So she has all this
data. She's like, "Well, let's do some statistical fits of black hole size and galaxy size."
Also the color of galaxies can indicate the relative speed or rate of star formation.
And the age.
- In the age, exactly, yeah.
All tied together, and so she's using Python for that.
Finally, data visualization, pretty straightforward,
but drawing graphs and pictures.
And the last part that was my favorite part is simulation.
So there's two really cool examples.
What happens if a star gets too close to a black hole?
And gets, she said, spaghetti-ified, which is cool.
And the other one is examples of galaxies colliding,
which is just, again, mind-blowing.
But really cool computational examples of all that.
So I wanted to highlight this video
'cause it's super accessible,
but it's also really neat to show concrete examples
of real science being done with Python.
- Yeah, I thought it was cool when she was talking
to her colleague about building the simulations
of the universe.
You have a simulation of the universe.
Where do you start on that?
It's like, we think we have project blocking.
It's like you start on a project,
it's like, yeah, I'm just gonna build a tool.
where do I begin?
It's like, I'm gonna build a simulation
of the entire universe.
Where do I start?
- Exactly.
I'm gonna simulate gravity at a graphic scale.
Let's just do that.
Yeah, awesome.
So if people are out there
and they're interested in this kind of stuff, yeah.
- This is all in one video?
- Yeah, this is all in one video.
- Wow, that's cool.
- Robert says star or galaxy, it's big.
They're both huge, but obviously,
and it's just like, I can't get my head around
like galaxy-sized stuff.
Stars and a star as a primitive type in the universe,
and then a galaxy as a collection.
That's what I just immediately go to right there,
like data structures.
Exactly.
Yeah, so Brian, it's like a 15-minute video
that half of it is the stuff that I talked about,
and half is what Jason touched on.
She actually interviews one of her colleagues
who basically does the simulation side of programming.
That's pretty cool.
Yeah.
I love to check that out.
- Yeah, it's definitely worth it.
- Yeah, I enjoyed it.
I don't do very much data science actually at all.
And so it's like, you know, understanding,
seeing data science stuff is always interesting to me
'cause I, most of my work is in like, you know,
application development.
So I don't usually work with a lot of statistical data.
So it's neat to see that side of it explained in this,
like, you know, really cool, relevant way.
Instead of like, well, the statistics
is the number of people, you know, who, you know,
buy, you know, cheese every weekend,
but the supermarket is not interesting.
galaxies, wow.
Exactly.
Getting better click-through rates on your ads is not super compelling, but I think it's
really valuable to see alternate perspectives, right?
We all get into our own little world of like, "This is what programming is.
This is what Python is for," and then it's bigger.
I want to talk about NumPy a little bit.
All right.
Tell us about it.
I've actually, I've used NumPy off and on a lot.
And it's definitely a staple of scientific use of Python
and machine learning and all sorts of stuff.
But I'm starting to use it more.
And I've realized that I had the wrong mental model.
So I like think of arrays kind of just like lists,
but they're not, they're sort of a different thing.
And so I came across this article.
that's a couple of years old, but it's a visual intro
to NumPy and data representation.
And to me, it really helps a lot,
like to help me understand what you can do with it
and just have a good mental picture
of what the arrays are in NumPy.
So it talks about arrays, matrices,
and in the arrays, which are in dimensional arrays.
But like, for instance, even just creating an array,
I knew how to create an array.
I mean, you just kind of initialize it with a list
and you get an array.
But I didn't know you could do like just say,
I want a list of ones or a list of zeros
or an array of ones or array of zeros
or just a random array pre-filled with random numbers.
That's pretty cool.
I didn't know you could do that.
That's neat.
And then he talks about arithmetic you can do with them
and slicing and indexing and stuff and aggregation.
- You know, Brian, like when we talk about
code all the time like, oh, you could write code in this way where you kind of
hack a numerical for loop, but you should do this other way and that would be more
Pythonic. I suspect there's also a...
A numpy way. A numpy way, right? Yeah.
Like filling up stuff, like, oh, you should just do ones on this one and then
then you know you always like there's a lot of cool other ways of sort of
conceptualizing things, right?
Yeah. Well, and it's it's worth remembering and I've said this quite a
a few times, not here, obviously. But I regularly
like to remind people, abstractions are there to save
us typing never to save us thinking. It's like it helps to
have that mental model, as you put it, Brian, you know,
straight, because if your mental model is wrong, it can really
wind up, well, you're prone to both cargo cold programming,
while I do it this way, because it's the way I was taught, or
trying to, you know, ill fit pattern that's familiar to, you
know, the wrong sort of problem, and you don't realize what it
you're really working with. So understanding what's happening under the hood, even if you
know, you don't know all the technical details of the implementation, still understanding
how it's doing things is important to, you know, choosing the right tools for the job.
The idiomatic pattern always.
Yeah, you'll hear stuff like, Oh, well, Python is slow. It's like, well, because you're doing
it wrong. Don't do it that way. Yeah, for example, you just something like NumPy, right?
And like, for instance, one of the things I really loved about this article was the
explanation of dot product because I've heard this before.
I've never had to use a dot product,
but it like somebody described it to me several times and I'm like, yeah, okay.
Weird. But then like the visual representation of it,
I looked like just stared at it and read it for like, you know, 30 seconds.
And I'm like, Oh, that's easy. Now I get it.
And I'll have it forever now because of, of that sunk in there.
And it's pretty good. One of the reasons why I went to it,
I had this problem is that I have large arrays,
but they're not huge.
They're in the thousands, say, of numbers.
And I need to make sure that one array is
comparing to another.
I know equal works.
I can compare for equality.
But I wanted to compare item by item
to make sure every element is less than the element
in the other array, less than or equal.
I didn't know how to do that.
And I'm like, I think NumPy would probably do that easy.
- Can you do one NumPy array less than the other?
- Yeah, so if you say less than,
it compares it element by element
and it gives you a list of true or false.
And then you can do all.
- Yeah, do an all on it, yeah.
- You can just say all of these two arrays
less than or equal to each other.
And I get exactly what I want
in a very expressive, simple line of code.
- Yeah, it's that kind of stuff I was thinking of
when I was talking about like the NumPyc,
- Yeah.
- NumPionic way or whatever.
- Idiomatic NumPy.
- Thank you.
(laughing)
- Is like, that's like one or two lines
and it's really fast.
Whereas you could loop over each item individually
and it not only is more code, but it's also slower.
- Yeah, well, and also I like, I also have to,
I like that there's the intermediate step of that.
There's, gives me a list of true and false too,
because I also on the debugging side,
I need to be able to like wrap this in something
that can pick, like say the first five elements
that are not matching.
I mean, I don't want, if it's false,
if the whole statement's false,
I don't wanna like just say,
list all the thousands that are wrong,
but I wanna be able to list a few to say,
at least these are not in the right order or something.
- Yeah. - So, yeah, it's good.
- I'm gonna try out NumPy now.
I now have a reason to try it out.
- Exactly, like why am I not using this
in certain situations?
- Magnus of the live stream says,
"Two dimensions is okay, three is hard,
"but in, then my mind blows."
Yeah, I actually did a bunch of math research
and four dimensional stuff,
two dimensional but complex numbers.
So four dimensional sort of,
and yeah, it's just hard.
- Well, one of my weird knacks as a programmer
is I actually can think in six dimensions.
It's, I mentioned before the podcast,
I had a head injury a few years ago,
so I'm a minor traumatic savant.
I can think in six dimensions.
And the best way I can explain it,
if you're trying to do it without having a really bizarre brain like mine, is think of
the fourth dimension as a timeline. And for each timeline, you have space represented
as a cube, but then you have this row of cubes which represents the timeline. It becomes
a lot easier to think of four-dimensional arrays when you think of it in that fashion.
Yeah, and the way that we did it, we actually had animations of that three-dimension thing,
the animations were moving through that bit.
But still, it's no easy thing.
Yeah, it's easier when you're an animator to wrap your head
around 4D than if you're just an ordinary run-of-the-mill
programmer like most of us.
Brian, would you say that that's a GUI type of solution?
No.
Maybe you could do something with Qt?
Yeah, yeah.
Qt?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, I don't know.
Jason?
Yeah, who knows?
It's possible.
So, that's our next topic.
Take a grab it Jason.
Yeah, well, okay.
Well, I, so I was really excited to discover the Qt 6 just released on December 8th.
So Qt, it is officially pronounced Qt, although it's much, it's very debatable.
People like, oh, it's Qt, it's Qt.
Jif, Gif, Con.
Yeah, exactly.
Anyway, whatever you're going to call it, it just released.
And this includes the Python binding.
So, Pieside 6, Shabokan 6, which is the...
So, Pieside 2 is QT5, as if that made sense.
Pieside 6 is QT6, or Qt6, even how I'm doing it.
Anyway, so that just released.
and you also have the PiQT6, if you prefer Riverbank's version.
But, in whatever case, you're gonna wind up with, with all the Qt6 features.
I think the coolest thing here is if you're doing really fancy graphics,
is that previously Qt 5 and prior had this hard dependency on OpenGL,
and they've actually put in what they call the rendering hardware interface
with an abstraction layer into Qt.
So now it can natively support whatever the 3D graphics driver is on that device,
whether it's DirectX, Vulkan, Metal, whatever you want it to work with.
So it uses the native by default.
You could tell it to use whatever you want.
- That is so cool.
- Yeah, and there's a bunch of other optimizations
and fixes to have in here.
I am really excited because I discovered,
and this was actually introduced in 5.15,
but they now support Snake Case.
For those of us who are like PEP 8 addicts,
who really hate the fact that Qt kind of seemed
to force you to use the Camel Case,
you can use Snake Case.
there is a setting for it.
You can also use properties instead of getters and setters
as of Qt 6.
So you can just rely on properties
and that is, it makes it a lot easier to write,
you know, idiomatic Python code that is cute,
which is kind of fun.
- Well, it just feels wrong to write, you know,
get with, set with.
- Yeah, absolutely.
They also have this cool thing called property binding
where you can actually link those together now too,
is like you can link the width and the height.
So when you change the width,
the height automatically changes, which is beautiful.
- Nice.
- Oh, cool.
- Yeah, I really wanna build some stuff with Qt.
I've got a few app ideas in mind.
What I don't have is time.
Sadly.
Can you help me with that, Jason?
Tell me, is that more time?
- Well, I know I have a reputation as a time lord,
but unfortunately I can't control
the stream of flow of time there.
If I find my TARDIS, I'll pick you up and drop you off 10 years ago, and you can relive
those 10 years and do some additional things.
Okay.
Nice.
Yeah.
That would be good.
Let's see.
Actually, a couple of questions from the live stream.
Magnus asks, "Any news about Qt going mobile?"
I actually am ashamed to admit I don't know.
I don't know either.
- I think the bigger, more interesting question would,
could PyQt, the stuff, like,
would you be able to write a Python Qt application
and make it mobile, right?
I think that's where it gets really interesting.
'Cause there's other, if you pick another language
like C++, there's other options you might be able to choose.
And then, maybe you know this one,
you're gonna ask,
are there any well-known Python apps built with Qt?
- Oh yeah, yeah, there, and on the spot,
I'm trying to think of what, mine?
(laughs)
It's not well known, but I built Timecard in Qt.
If you look up, if you open up Timecard,
it's just a time tracking app that I built.
But actually there's quite a lot that's built with Qt.
I think with a K in front of it, if you're into KDE,
the entire KDE stack is built on top of Qt
and there's actually quite a bit of it that's done in Python.
So names are escaping me off the top of my head here,
But yeah, anything in the KDE universe is cute.
And so you're either gonna get C++ or Python.
Python is certainly a lot faster to write.
- Oh, FileZilla apparently is built.
You know, one that I know that's written in it for sure,
that is like one of my favorite apps actually,
is RoboMongo or Robo3T, it got renamed too.
I believe it's just C++, it's not Python.
but that one's a really nice one as well.
Actually, there's a huge long list,
I'll put in the show notes over here,
of a bunch of apps written as well.
So.
- Yeah, it's definitely a lot easier to write something.
I've used a lot of different GUI toolkits
and Qt's definitely one of the easiest to get started with.
- The thing that I like about it is it looks like it belongs
'cause so many apps you build with these sort of
cross platform things and it's just like,
well, okay, well, that's not how the file dialogue
is supposed to look.
You know it's alien, but you're like,
"No, no, this looks like it belongs here."
- Right, well, and packaging's the other half of it,
because I tried to build something with Kivy,
and I love Kivy from a development standpoint,
it's really cool, but from a packaging standpoint,
it's like beating yourself to death with a wet trout.
So, and actually, if you're gonna do cross-platform,
then actually, GTK's horrible too,
because it's really hard to get it to package
on Windows a lot of times.
Qt just works, it just packages everywhere,
which is nice.
- Yeah, that's great.
That's nice.
All right, Brian, I think this episode
is brought to everyone by us.
- Wonderful.
- We are, we're doing a lot of work out there,
as everyone probably knows.
If you're into testing, check out Brian's pytest book.
If you're looking to take a Python course,
we are just about to pass 200 hours of Python courses
over at Talk Python Training.
I'm working on a new course, how to build web apps, not web APIs, but web apps with
FastAPI.
Super neat stuff.
So that should be out in a week or two.
So anyway, check that out.
Yeah, I also wanted to bring up that there was kind of a spike in the pytestbook sales
in the last quarter of 2020.
And I'm hoping that it's because maybe some schools are using it to try to help teach
testing, while they're teaching software.
That'd be cool.
Yeah, that'd be super cool.
Yeah, it's nice to see more, more, more, more stuff about
stuff other than unit test. I mean, unit test has its place.
But I, when I wrote the I've got a book coming out in May. And
when I wrote the chapter on testing, and one of my editors
was like, Thank you for not forcing me to edit yet one more
unit test chapter.
Nice. What's your book on?
Oh, my book's called dead simple Python. It just it it
introduces the language of Python, the idiomatic practices
of Python to people who are coming from another language. So
So if you don't want to have to sit through yet one more explanation of what a variable
or a function is or a class is, you can pick this up and it dives straight into the fine
details of why idiomatic patterns are what they are in Python.
>> Nice.
>> Yeah, that's a great idea.
The courses or books that say, "We're going to pretend you know nothing about the world
and we're going to force you to go through everything from scratch every time," that
drives me crazy.
- What else drives me crazy, Brian,
is when my Python GC is doing stuff
when I know that it doesn't need to do stuff.
- Yeah, I like to not have to think
about the garbage collector.
- And you generally don't, right?
Like one of the things that genuinely surprises me
is the fact that we don't really talk
about memory very much in Python.
It's like, oh, okay, I think it cleans itself up.
That's good.
Now what?
Let's go about stuff, right?
But if you dig into it, it's pretty interesting.
There's a lot of stuff around allocation we've covered before, but it's quite unique.
But Python's also somewhat unique in the sense that it has two modes.
So it has reference counting, which I would say 98% of all memory management cleanup stuff
is in the reference counting side.
This is totally made up, these numbers.
But I would say maybe even more, like 99.5, unless you're building some kind of certain
kind of app with interesting algorithms.
Most apps don't create cycles.
The only reason we have garbage collection, in addition to the reference counting, is
to catch those cycles.
I've got a customer object.
I've got it out of a SQLAlchemy database.
It has a relationship over to the orders.
I go to the orders.
The orders have a link back to the customer.
Maybe traversing that lazy loaded list has created a cycle.
Now I need the GC to save me.
The rule for when the garbage collector runs is you can ask it, you can say, "Import the
GC module," say, "GC.getthreshold," or "thresholds."
I can't remember if it's singular or plural on my screen if I would switch to it.
Singular, getthreshold.
It returns three numbers.
They're not the same units, which makes them really hard to understand.
The first number is how many allocations of collection objects, so classes, dictionaries,
lists, tuples, things that could contain other stuff.
Things that could potentially be participants in a cycle, like numbers and strings are not
even considered by the GC.
How many allocations of collection types are there that exceed the reference counting deallocation?
If I had a list and I put a thousand class objects in it by allocating and filling it
up, then I would hold on to a thousand and none of them would have become garbage.
The first number that comes back is, well,
how big is that number before we just run a GC, no matter what?
And the default is 700.
So my example there, if I create a list of 1,000 objects,
that's a GC that's going to run.
It doesn't matter if there are cycles, there's no cycles.
It just doesn't matter.
I've made 1,000 of them.
That's over 700, so we're going to run a GC.
And then the rest are like, how much do you run?
A whole memory GC versus a small, recent object GC?
And what occurred to me is, you know my website.
There's a lot of pages that pull back thousands of items
and any website that uses the database and an ORM
that pulls stuff back and hangs on to it
and not just like streams over the items
but puts them maybe in a list or something temporarily.
Anytime you do that more with that thousand,
you're gonna have the GC run, right?
- So just looking for anything to throw away basically.
- Yeah, but you know, you're still in the process
of building the list of them.
I gotta get 10,000.
Well, guess what?
That means you're gonna have 14 GCs.
And you're just in the process of building the list.
I'm like, that's kind of weird.
That seems excessive to me.
And then I went and looked at the site map
on TalkByThon training,
where we're pulling back like thousands of transcripts
and all sorts of stuff to generate all the pages on there.
77, there's 77 GCs to render the site map.
There's no cycles.
There's not one.
So I'm like, that's not good.
Well, let me think about that for a second.
So what I ended up doing was I said,
well, what if I made the threshold 10,000?
Actually, I ended up on 50,000.
So only run the GC if you get more than 50,000 allocations
without deallocations.
What was really interesting is doing that,
made my unit tests,
which were including many, many integration tests
on TalkByDone training, run 10 to 12% faster.
Just setting that one line.
And it basically does not use more memory, in my case.
Is that crazy?
Well, it makes sense. Most issues of performance
just come down to memory and how memory allocation and deallocation takes--
I spend almost all my time in C++, more time in C++ than I do in Python.
We don't have a garbage collector over there, so you have to do all this manually.
- And doing it right and doing it wrong. - You know how much work it is, right?
Yeah, exactly. It's like doing it wrong is why stuff's slow.
People are like, "Well, Python's slower than C++."
Well, it has a potential.
C++ has the potential to be faster than Python.
But it really depends on how you write that code, because well-written code is always
going to run faster than poorly written code.
It doesn't matter what the two languages are.
Yeah.
I realized that in my world, in my type of application, I almost never create cycles,
but I often get back more than 700 class objects, which also have dictionaries potentially in
the mix as they're like allocating the converting serializing into classes.
There's gotta be a lot of places where that's happened.
So I just set this number to say, you know what?
Let's waste a little bit of memory,
and if there are cycles, we'll come back and get 'em later.
And because there's almost no cycles,
there's almost no memory growth.
For example, so the server is running
like eight worker processes, one of them.
And I made this change, and I think over,
after running for a week without restarting
any of the processes, it went from 1.89 gigs
of memory usage to 1.91.
So like 220 megs?
I think it was 20 megs more memory usage,
and yet like 10% speed up by just changing
like one call at startup.
It was insane.
- Well, and think about what Dr. Becky's code,
it'll like go back to the astrophysicist thing here,
with the sizes of data structures that she's doing
or any data scientist who's listening,
they're usually dealing with 10,000, 100,000 million items.
You combine this with all the stuff
that we talked about with NumPy and with data processing,
and we talk about how long it takes
to do some of these data regressions,
how much would this speed that up?
- Yeah, exactly.
So if that data is being done in Python
and it's not just purely being pushed down
into the C data science layer,
then yeah, that's really interesting, I think.
- Although I would caution at the same time
that there's no such thing as a magic bullet.
So you have to understand why this is gonna speed things up
and not just think, well, I have to just copy and paste
that line that my colleague has
that he got from Michael Kennedy,
because it'll make the code faster.
No, you have to know why it's gonna make the code faster.
- It's an easy test, some cases that make sense.
People can check it out.
I thought it was really, it just so surprised me.
I was walking along with it, I'm like, wait a minute,
that must mean something weird is going on.
And then I put it on just on one of my pages,
like why would I do 77 GCs on a single page load?
That's crazy.
And so I just started exploring this and here we are.
- So did you, whatever you're linking to,
Does it talk about how you can test how many garbage collections?
>> Let me see.
I'm leaking to a Twitter thread.
And way deep down.
No, but there is a way to do it.
If you go to the GC, I think it's set debug stats or something.
I'll look it up real quick while we're talking.
I'll throw it in at the end here.
But yeah, there's a way to do it.
Actually, I got it right here.
hold on, give me just a sec.
The way you do it is you say gc.set_debug,
and then you pass in enumeration,
and the value is gc_debug_stats.
- Okay.
- So that thing was just lighting up.
When I turned that on, it would just light up,
it would just completely fill the terminal
with gc, gc, gc, gc, gc, over and over and over
when I hit that one page, and then changing it,
guess what, made it better.
- Yeah, now we should probably be PC about the gc,
and call the garbage collector the programmatic sanitation
engineer.
But--
[LAUGHTER]
Well, it doesn't take offense.
It's just there to help us out.
[LAUGHTER]
Brian, it's probably a pretty awesome library,
honestly, the GC library.
Probably, but it's built in.
Yeah, so I'm-- of course, I'm susceptible to click
on a listicle.
but the...
Who is it? Come on.
Right, but we don't cover them very much, but I really like this.
So this article is top 10 Python libraries of 2020,
but their criteria was interesting.
The criteria was it has to be a library that was launched or popularized in 2020,
has to be well maintained,
and has have maintenance and changes since their launch date.
And it has to be just outright cool that you should check it out.
So, I'm going to go through a handful of these. They listed 10.
I don't know if all of them, since there's like four of them that are machine learning focused that I really don't understand.
Yeah, I think cool is relative.
Yeah,
but the first one was Typer.
And I'm like,
I'm really a fan of Typer now.
Was it really just 2020 and I went back and look and it was released like yeah in December of 2019
Yeah, Sebastian Ramirez is killing it for sure. And then I looked in it. I'm like well FastAPI when that come out
well, that was the previous December so
the end of 2018 released
FastAPI and then type or a year later. He's just crushing it. Yeah, so yeah nice
a huge fan of both of those.
A big fan of Rich also.
So Rich actually just showed up this in last year in 2020.
And Rich is a beautiful,
beautiful formatting in the terminal.
And yes, it's a beautiful, it's really great.
- Let me use that, that's glorious.
- I'm even using it even in applications
where I just need these, the tables.
So if you need to print out a table in the command line,
The tables are kind of hard and there were like weird other,
there were other table, like specialized table libraries.
But this one is great that you can, it works,
you don't have to specify the width
that like comes up with the width on its own.
And then you, if you shrink the terminal
to really narrow or wide,
it'll word wrap correctly and stuff.
And that's kind of incredible.
So even just for tables, I'll use it, Rich.
So that's good.
- Yeah, Rich is awesome.
- The third one is DeerPiGUI.
I think we covered this.
Maybe we could, I don't remember.
- I don't remember.
I mean, we did go on our GUI rant,
so it feels like it should be.
- Yeah, so it's a GUI project.
Nice pictures though, at least.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I've been drooling over it.
I've been drooling over DeerImGUI for a while.
I haven't had an opportunity to use it yet,
but I've been looking at it,
want to build something with this.
Yeah.
So the last few I want to highlight.
Pretty errors looks neat.
I haven't tried that yet, but it's a way to--
That's glorious as well.
--better tracebacks.
I mean, ideally, you don't show errors to people.
But if you're going to, let's make them at least readable.
This is great.
And let's treat ourselves, too.
It's like we're going to have to read the--
we're going to spend at least half our life reading error
messages, let's face it.
So let's at least make them readable.
Another quarter crying about what we just couldn't figure out.
And then the last two that I want to highlight
is diagrams and scaling.
Diagrams is a library-- look at that picture.
It's a way to do--
it's intended for cloud architecture drawings,
but it's written in Python.
You write these diagrams in Python.
And so because they're text, you can check them in
and with version control and stuff better.
- That's cool.
- Which is nice.
I'd like to see these sorts of diagrams look more,
would be great for not just network diagrams,
other diagrams would be cool like that.
- Flowchart would be great in that.
I'd go flowchart.
- Yeah, so the last one is Scalene,
which is a CPU and memory profiler in Python
that handles multi-threading well
and distinguishes between Python versus non-Python memory usage
and run time and stuff.
So that's pretty cool.
I definitely need to try this out.
I also like that you don't have to modify your code to use it.
So you can point this at your code
instead of having to add things.
- That is nice.
- Absolutely.
Yeah, those are cool.
There's a bunch of great ideas there.
And man, I really need to find a use for Rich.
>> The solution is sort of a problem again, but hey.
>> Well, I write a lot of like little terminal apps and stuff,
and I'm just like, maybe you'll put a little color in here or something,
and I just need to take the time and go,
"No, this is a UI that I should pay more attention to,
not just some random thing with text."
>> Yeah. We find this cool stuff,
it's like I want to use,
I feel the need to use this somewhere.
>> Exactly.
>> I had a little application where it's just like I said,
with the tables.
And I'm like, I don't think it needs colors.
I'm just showing a table.
But the default for Rich is to show colors.
And you don't have to pick them.
It just picks some good colors for you.
So the heading and the lines between
were like different colors if you're on a color terminal.
And if you're not on a color terminal, it works anyway.
It just figures that out for you.
And lovely, love it.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
It's awesome.
- Yeah, that's beautiful.
- It's very awesome.
Awesome. Speaking of awesome. So, PEP 518 rolled out a while
back, I was introducing this thing called pyproject.toml. I
guess it's pronounced Tom or whatever. I'll say that
pyproject.toml. So the idea behind this was that it was
going to be this configuration file, you know, one
configuration file to rule them all. And of course, we're in
Python, we like things to be simple. Well, ironically, this
turned into a really political thing, which I'm still trying
to wrap my head around. So basically, the nice thing about
this repository is it's keeping track of all the projects that
have adopted PyProject TOML, either optionally or mandatory
for the configuration. So instead of having to have, you
know, a dozen configuration files in your project for all
these different tools, you can just use this one. And so it's
got this big list. What I find interesting is this part down
here at the bottom, if you go down to, yeah, just scroll just
slightly here, just slightly, just a little bit up.
That's gonna sound weird on the podcast.
Anyway, so if you're gonna,
so these are projects that are quote unquote
discussing the use of PyProject TOML.
But if you actually look at these,
it's kind of odd, you know, the big sticking points,
'cause these are the projects that are like
stopping people from really just going all in
on PyProject TOML.
And there's even some, you know,
talk about circular, you know, dependencies.
Or some are like, well, I'll do it when they do it.
And they're like, "Well, we'll do it when they do it."
Which makes you wonder if it's an excuse.
So, mypye is the weirdest.
Wietervan Rossum himself said, "Well, it doesn't solve anything."
You know, someone said, "Can we just add this, please? Just add it. It's easy. Here's the PR."
Someone even did the PR. He's like, "Nah, it doesn't solve anything."
And he closed it. It's like, "it does solve something. It's one less file I have to deal with. That is a solution."
Flake8, they have a couple of concrete objections.
One is the fact we don't have the standard Tomo parser
in the Python standard library.
So that could be a problem.
You're adding another dependency to just support having this format.
Exactly, yeah.
But then again, it's a common dependency
with a bunch of other tools that are already in use
and it almost doesn't matter.
Pip, someone said, I don't understand this.
"Is pip to change its behavior so mere presence of the file
doesn't change functionality?"
I can't wrap my head around what he's referring to there.
I may be obtuse.
But the stupid thing is someone already did Flake 9,
which is an exact fork of Flake 8
that just adds PyProject Tommel.
So it's like, it's done.
They just have to merge it.
But it's, and actually the same thing happened with Bandit.
Someone actually implemented it in 2019.
The PR has been sitting there untouched since 2019.
So over a year's gone by, it's there
and Bandit is not picking it up.
They're just, they're silent. Read the docs is saying it's too much work.
it's like it's a lot of work for us to have the multiple.
PyOxidizer, shockingly, hasn't even said anything since 2019.
They're like the, they're like the new trendy, like the trend-setting packaging thing.
And they haven't been saying anything about this.
So I'm trying to figure out why it is that this is so controversial.
because it seems so obvious.
You have one file to store all of the settings
for all the different tools.
And yet, everybody seems to want to do their own thing
with this.
Well, I know that pip, ENF, and Poetry, and FLIT,
and some of these other tools that suggest a workflow,
I feel like I hear this file format being
used along with those.
and telling people we're going to have a different way for you to work with your projects and
manage dependencies and stuff.
I think that's part of the source of this and I don't know if it's just necessarily
all mixed together.
Brian, what do you think?
You know more about this than I do.
I think a lot of projects are on the side of, like for instance, coverage was, I don't
know where they are on the list.
That they adopted.
Did they adopt it?
Yeah, well coverage had this thing and other tools were talking about
You know, there's no toml parser and they they didn't have any other dependencies so they didn't want to add a third-party dependency
Just for this
And and if they're just using it for packaging, however, or or their settings or something like that, but um the
So I do think we will see a lot.
I don't think it's a reasonable argument
because there's reasons why--
the same reason why request isn't in,
because they're making changes.
But I do think that the format of TOML, the basic format,
enough to get a PyProject.toml isn't going to change much.
So I think enough of a project TOML parser
to handle PyProject.toml.
That's I think we need one of the something like that in the in in pipe built into Python
Yeah, especially since we have we have PEP 518. So like we have some we have some standard already as to what this is
Going to look like. Yeah, so I think we'll see a big
I would like to see at least
even if it isn't the mainstream one if we have if the if most projects that are okay with the third party use something
else
uh for a tomahawk parser, but there's some built-in
stripped down version in the standard library,
I think that would be fine too.
Yeah, I think that's where it's coming from.
- It could be.
- Yeah, I see you could solve that problem
by just vendoring it.
Just like, here's the two files that make up the parser.
We're just gonna make it part of this package.
So now we're good to go.
I don't know.
Sounds good.
Well, I think that's it for all of our items.
Brian, you got anything else you want to share with folks?
Yeah, it's my birthday.
Man, you're looking good for 28, brother.
So I'm 51 and I heard today that that's just
one, I'm just shy of a full deck.
Well, I've never been accused of playing with a full deck myself.
But I will say, don't let anyone tell you that you're old because
because it says in the first chapter of Genesis,
thou, and then God said, man's years shall be limited to 120.
Half of 120 is 60.
So it is biblical that 60 is middle-aged.
You're not even middle-aged yet.
[LAUGHTER]
You've got a way to go.
It's the Bible.
[LAUGHTER]
I keep telling everybody that I don't look at day over 73.
Ah, you're good, man.
A couple happy birthdays.
And also, you're going to ask if you're still a fan of "Flit."
Yeah, I love "Flit."
Especially since they adopted the source directory.
- Yeah, that's right, that's awesome.
- Yeah, that saved my life a few times.
- Jason, anything extra that you wanna throw out there?
I mean, maybe people have a place they could get notified
about your upcoming book or something like that?
- Yeah, you know, following me on Twitter
is probably the best way to do that.
I'm @CodeMouse92 on Twitter.
And then, actually, I follow No Starch Press too.
I mean, No Starch Press is awesome to begin with.
That's what you're doing the book.
Yeah, exactly.
They're my publisher.
No starch.
I don't think they ever put out a bad book.
I love that publisher.
So, I was, I can, you can actually, you can ask my mother when I got, when I
got, when my book contract got accepted, I actually screamed, very high pitched.
Yeah.
Follow follow the most arch press for updates on, on that and all their other
awesome.
They got some other incredible books coming up too.
And in the next year, so I'll go ahead and ask her.
So what's your mom's Twitter handle?
Oh, my mom's Twitter handle?
Oh, she doesn't have a Twitter handle, actually.
So I'll have to put you in touch directly, I think, unfortunately.
[LAUGHTER]
Awesome.
Well, cool.
Thanks for being here again.
So I have a couple of items to throw out here, actually.
This almost-- Brian, this almost could have been an extra, extra, extra, extra,
extra, extra, extra all about it.
But they're real short, so I didn't do that.
Django 3.15 is released.
Django 3, didn't we just go to Django 2 or something?
I mean, that's good.
That's really good to hear.
So awesome on that.
Python 3.10, alpha 4 is available for testing.
The new parser is going to be in that one, which is going to be...
That's the peg parser that Guido has been working on?
Yeah, that's going to revolutionize the language eventually.
Yeah, it'll definitely make it possible to do more.
And in releases, SciPy 1.6.0 was released.
I learned about a cool project.
So we talked about avoiding Excel for the Python data science stack.
Just stop doing Excel.
There's all these weird errors.
The organization that defines or governs how you can name genes has come up with rules
for names you can't use.
The reason they can't be used is they'll be parsed incorrectly into other data types by
Excel, for example.
So there's a lot of issues you might run into with Excel.
And that's all good, but there's this project called PyXLL.
And this is actually a paid product.
They're not sponsoring the show.
I just think it's kind of neat, so just spreading the word.
But anyway, if it's interesting for you, what you can do is it's a plugin for Excel that
will embed Jupyter into Excel and allow you to write functions and macros in Excel in
Python.
So basically, it almost adds Python, the programming language to Excel, which is good.
It's better than VBA.
Let's see.
>> I know.
I started in VBA.
Tell me about it.
Anything is better than VBA.
>> So someone on Twitter asked if PyCharm works okay on my Apple Mac mini M1.
And PyCharm and JetBrains in general just released a whole bunch of their tooling with
different installs for the Apple Silicon native versions.
And so I've got a cool little video
that I'm gonna link to in the show notes.
It's just like a five second video of here.
I opened up PyCharm and you basically,
from the time you click on open project
till the project's open, if you've opened a project before,
so that caveat, but at that point, if you click on it,
you cannot perceive the click.
Like by the time you're letting up the mouse,
the whole project is loaded and ready to work on.
It's insane.
- That's beautiful.
- Yeah.
- I will consider picking up PyCharm again
when they add live share into it, so yeah.
- They're working on it.
It's good.
There's something called Code With Me.
Yeah, yeah.
So I have not tried it.
I have no one to code with.
I'm sorry, but.
- Email me later.
We'll set something up.
- Yeah, exactly.
We'll go together.
So also, since I got my M1 like three, four weeks ago,
whatever, I've only used this for all my Python work.
And apparently, it's still going strong.
I even had to send in my MacBook Pro
because it had started shutting-- the battery was so bad,
it would shut down at 75%.
It's like, you know when it gets too low, it'll shut down?
And as the battery gets bad, maybe it shuts down at 10%
instead of zero?
If I'm doing video work, it'll actually shut down at 75%
until I plug it back in.
So it's all in one until that comes back.
Well, I'm still on my system 76 Linux,
so I can't speak much to Apple.
I do love my System76.
- That's cool.
I think this whole new ARM architecture stuff
that they're doing, it's gonna be interesting.
I think Microsoft's following suit
or trying in parallel with them.
It just felt to me like Intel and AMD,
that's just the way it was gonna be forever
and it's not necessarily the case.
- I don't have a problem with competition.
What I have a problem with is software companies
making their own architecture and it only works on their architecture.
That's what you move towards and then you wind up with a totally fragmented
industry. I think that's a mistake. Yeah, that's not going to be great.
So don't do it, Microsoft. It's not worth it.
Awesome. All right. Well, that's my extra, extra, extra, extra, extra, extra.
Right. Nice.
Now, I want to get an M1.
I'd like to get a mini.
Yeah, the mini is fantastic.
I really, really like it.
It's not even a joke.
I'm being serious.
But we do need a joke.
Yes.
Oh, I have a joke.
All right.
Yeah.
You got the joke this week.
I actually do have the joke this week.
Yeah.
And so why did the programmer always refuse to check his code into the repository?
Why?
He was afraid to commit.
So, yeah.
Yeah.
If you want to, if you want a regular dose of my, of my, that is one of my originals.
If you want a regular dose of my absolutely horrific puns, you can follow me on Twitter,
your own peril.
I post it every Monday.
I've got a new one.
Awesome.
Nice.
Thanks for being on the show.
Yeah, it was fun.
Yeah, thanks.
See you all.
Thanks everyone out there on the live stream and thanks everyone who listened.
Thanks.
See y'all.
Thanks, everyone out there on the live stream.
And thanks, everyone who listened.
See y'all.
[BLANK_AUDIO]